---
layout: default
title: Meditations on the PCT
---

I wrote this soon after leaving the trail in 2025 and have edited it minimally since.

---

## What it is like

&emsp I was often asked on-trail “what it is like” to thruhike. Although this is a lazy question that probably deserves no more than an equally lazy glib quip in response, I’ve nonetheless put considerable thought into how to answer it accurately. This is what I’ve come up with.  
&emsp When I set foot on-trail I chose to live a new life, and every day I woke up and chose to live another day of it. Acceptance of the hardships and discomforts involved is subsumed in this choice, because accepting a new life means accepting different standards for what is uncomfortable and hard. This isn’t to say that the new life didn’t feel demanding, because it did. Its day-to-day details required all of my attention and emotional capacity to handle. That, along with the facts that an average location on-trail tends to be uninteresting, and an average second contains no unusual event, has the surprising consequence that the time on-trail was overwhelmingly dominated by moments that were both inwardly and outwardly prosaic.  
&emsp Yet among these were moments of startling clarity where I realized that the integral of this life full of mundane moments was changing me in ways that were not mundane at all. The impact lay in the totality of the experience, not any one event, and, although when choosing what to describe one tends to focus on exceptional outlier events, to do so elides the essence of the PCT experience. Compare hiking the PCT to eating a bowl of fried rice. The extraordinary highs--watching the sun rise over the Tehachapi wind farm and the LA aqueduct, cresting Forester Pass, getting a first view of Crater Lake--these are the toppings in the fried rice. They round out the flavor and the character of the dish. But the uncountable moments spent starving and sweating and shivering and hurting and blistering and being rained on and hailed on and sunned on and windblown and bugbitten--these are the rice itself, the main body of the dish. They are what fills you. They are what changed my life.  
&emsp Because the PCT did change my life, both in a long-term sense and in the short-term sense that I’ve alluded to already. In the short term it meant a life that, though physically demanding, was emotionally and mentally refreshing. As students and practitioners of math we expend our mental energy on problems that are purely abstract, and as young professionals we expend our emotional energy on vague worries whose timescales stretch into the decades. Often we go for weeks without feeling like we have accomplished anything, and even when they do come our accomplishments can feel frustratingly intangible. And almost nobody I’ve met is certain whether they’re getting to where they’re trying to go, or even whether where they’re trying to go is the right place to try to be. On-trail I thought solely about such concrete details as where I would sleep at night, where I would next get water, and how many goddamn mosquitos there were and, in general, worried at most about five days into the future. Each day I accomplished something measurable and immediate, and at the end of each day I usually had the entire five day horizon of my existence planned out with almost no room for doubt. I was always sure where I wanted to be and always knew exactly how to get there. So maybe you can see why when I was on-trail, I went to bed with a battered body, but with an empty and content mind.  
&emsp It’s too early to say what the long-term changes are, but I’ve noticed some aftereffects that I think will stick. I’m more mindful of the difference between rest and entertainment and of our need for occasional stillness. When I’m still, I’m comfortable being alone with my thoughts, or even having no thoughts at all. I grasp better the relationship between material comfort and happiness. I have a new understanding that I am enriched by taking pride in and developing my physicality. I’m more socially confident and care less about the judgments of others. I’m more comfortable with the prospect of failure and with sincerely working toward the things that I find meaningful. I hide less behind protective layers of irony. I am able to live more and fear less, and that, to me, is the most important change.

---

## Milestones

&emsp There’s an app called FarOut for crowdsourcing trail information, and the comment section of the thousand mile waypoint on it is dominated by jokes about Vanessa Carlton and The Proclaimers. Personally, I think these are funny because they juxtapose non-thruhiker and thruhiker mindsets. In the thruhiker’s mind, this marker occurs at merely another one of those uncountable prosaic moments forming the thruhiker’s life. It is not even interesting enough to be underwhelming. The trail surrounding it is unremarkable. There’s a small wooden sign marking the location, and Scout and I dutifully took a photo there because we understood abstractly that our non-thruhiker friends would expect one. But we didn’t linger, as we’d only gone twelve miles that day and our lunch break wasn’t for another hour. Anyway, even if it were time to stop, the ground was too covered in branches to sit on, and there were no nice logs or rocks nearby to sit on instead. There was nobody else there.  
&emsp Was there any sense, you might wonder, of culmination or accomplishment? There was, but only in the people watching us from home. My dad distributed photos of us standing behind the wooden sign to anybody with voluntary or obligatory interest in our lives. My mom cried and waxed poetic about our determination and strength. Scout’s grandmother informed everyone in her nursing home that her dearest own granddaughter had just walked a thousand miles and was two fifths of the way to Canada.  
&emsp But we were no longer there to walk any number of miles, nor did we wake up each morning looking back or forward at an imagined milestone. By then, we were just living a new life, one with a tiny past and future horizon, beyond which the remote thoughts of the distant beginning and unrealized end seldom rose. Occasionally, while living this life, the total number of miles walked totalled to an aesthetically pleasant number like a thousand, but we didn’t feel at those moments like we’d walked a thousand miles. In both a literal and emotional sense, we’d only walked twelve.  
&emsp Perhaps now you can understand the humor we felt at the time: that one can wake up and start an unremarkable day and, just halfway through it, find yourself thrust into a mythical role from a kitschy love song. It’s an impossible thing you’ve just done, the songs imply. Its role in the lyrics is to exist only in the sentiment as a grandiose symbol of devotion. To actually do such a thing is unnecessary, absurd, and borderline Quixotic. But all we had done was walk twelve miles.  
&emsp On the other hand, perhaps now you can also understand the near total absence of comments at the two thousand mile waypoint. All that was remarkable about the one thousand mile waypoint were these jokes, and those only need to be made once.
	
---

## Almost quitting, and not choosing to quit.

&emsp Around the fifth week on-trail near mile four hundred, I decided to quit. We’d recently bumped our daily mileage from fifteen to eighteen, the monotony of the desert had begun to grate on me, and I had gotten through the initial burst of energy that gets so many people through the first bit of an undertaking only to strand them shortly after it runs out. For these reasons, I’d had a rough few days. Each morning I woke up dreading walking, and while I did I thought primarily about how much I hated it. I began talking constantly about all the luxurious things I would do after I “got out,” and finally Scout got so frustrated with my whinging that she told me that if I was consistently that miserable, I should choose to leave.  
&emsp I resisted this logic for a minute or so, feeling that it was rather lame to quit and scared of the finality of such a decision. But after a minute I decided that she was correct and that I met the premises of the syllogism, and therefore informed her that I’d leave once we reached Acton, a town about two days ahead of us. She realized that this wasn’t really what she wanted, so eventually we worked out a compromise where I would postpone my decision past Acton and she would consent to taking it easy for a day or two out of town. But I felt at the time that this compromise merely alleviated the symptoms of an irreconcilable incompatibility between me and the trail life. I suspected that my departure was inevitable.  
On both days into Acton we got trail magic from former thru-hikers. The first guy gave me a beer and shared a bowl with me, and afterward, malaise salved by a heady mix of THC and alcohol, I floated serenely through the last miles of the day. The second group had left a sign by a trail junction telling us to look out for them up ahead, and, primed for food that wasn’t freeze-dried or cold, I took off running for their pavilion at the first whiff of freshly grilled meat. I remember eating a burger, two or three hot dogs, some salad, several servings of chips, a muffin, a cookie, a sleeve of Oreos, a Coors Light, and a cup of soda. My stomach cramped so badly afterward I nearly vomited. I have seldom been happier.  
In Acton we showered, did laundry, and had a real meal at a restaurant with a scratch kitchen. In Agua Dulce we had fresh ice cream, another real meal, a fun night cowboy camped on the concrete walkway of a strip mall, and even a surprise celebrity encounter (more on that later). By the time we left Aqua Dulce, I was no longer thinking about quitting.  
&emsp Trail magic and restorative town visits are not reliable features of the trail. The fact that they were what had kept me going meant that I had been carried through my emotional nadir by a series of serendipities. I had been saved, in other words, by luck.  
&emsp But this one run of luck, it turns out, bought all the time for me to mature into trail life. I began to find satisfaction in walking, peace in the natural immersion, and joy in the daily routine. I grew more accustomed to the hardships and grew to take pride in my ability to endure them. I became acquainted with boredom and learned to enjoy mental silence. I learned to appreciate simple pleasures. I found numerous mental tricks for persistence, like compartmentalizing a day into manageable chunks broken up by small rewards like meals or breaks. I learned that emotions are transient; the self can stay above them. When the lows came again, I was better equipped to endure them, and never again did I think seriously about quitting. I’m still grateful for that run of luck and the kind people it brought me to, for without them I would have lost all that followed. Nevertheless, all that followed was my own.  
&emsp The fact is (and this is so obvious on the face of it that it seems silly to state) that to finish something like the PCT you just have to not choose to quit. And not choosing to quit is easy if framed correctly. After all, to quit the PCT while on it is actually a significant hassle--you have to walk to the next town, arrange ad-hoc transportation from somewhere that is probably quite remote, admit to everyone you told about the hike that you couldn’t hack it, and live forever with the knowledge that you failed. On the other hand, to not choose to leave only involves walking another two hours until lunch. (To compare the total pain of leaving with the pain involved in hiking an arbitrarily small interval of trail is logically fallacious, but even knowing this, the comparison was emotionally compelling). Moreover, not choosing to leave during a short hike is no different from not choosing to leave during a long one, as the length of time remaining in a hike does not impact one’s experience in the moment. I’d never chosen to leave during any day hike, so why should I choose to leave during the PCT (another compelling fallacy)? So each day I didn’t make the choice to leave, and as the days piled up, eventually they piled up into something that, when looking back from outside that life, is remarkable.  
&emsp But all I had done was not leave, and at first I felt that this diminished the accomplishment, because up until the PCT I only considered something personally worthwhile to do if I had some kind of natural talent for it or it required some unique skill of mine. There was no point, I thought, in me doing something anybody else could do just by being stubborn. But eventually, I realized how important it was for my personal growth to do something that just required grit, and that gave my perseverance extra meaning.  

---

## Food
&emsp There was nothing I felt more keenly deprived of on-trail than food. The basic arithmetic is inescapable. Hiking 8-10 hours a day with a full pack consumes 3500-4000 calories a day, but the physical limits on our carrying capacity and the distances between towns meant that we usually got by on 2500-3000 calories. Within a week, we’d learned to ration everything meticulously. Within two weeks we were checking calorie counts on everything we bought. Within a month, we were eating every crumb and scraping every smudge of frosting or peanut butter out of wrappers and jars. I chewed all of my food as slowly as possible, both to savor the feeling of eating and in hopes of extracting as many calories as possible out of it. In towns we ate meals at restaurants ranging up to 2500 calories and snacked constantly, splitting loaves of bread, entire cakes, and large bags of fruit (a luxury on-trail) in a day. Despite all this, it was never enough. We were constantly hungry and constantly undernourished. When I weighed myself around mile 1200, I’d lost 25 pounds. By the end, I’d lost 40.  
&emsp At a resort at the end of the Sierra called Kennedy Meadows North, we walked into a restaurant where there was a large party of about twelve sitting along a table in a corner. They had five or six kids in tow and had ordered adult meals for all of them. Shortly after we arrived, they left without asking for any to-go boxes, leaving five or six meals lying less than half finished on the table. I was aghast. The sheer profligacy of it floored me. To a person who had spent six days eating inadequate portions of freeze-dried powdered cheese from a plastic pouch, abandoning that much fresh, restaurant-quality food to be thrown away was so tasteless it verged on profane. I’m not sure they would’ve offended me more if they had shat on the floor. Very nearly I went up to their table and shoveled the leftovers away. Only Scout’s acid remarks about appropriate behavior in public held me back. Barely.  
&emsp Picture the two of us eating lunch one day around mile 1700. Lunch meaning some meagre fucking portion of dried meat and snack cracker. I was sitting across from Scout, and as I shook out a wrapper, I saw a crumb drop from her mouth onto her leg. I remember how tasty it looked sitting there. Fluffy, white, slightly sticky. It would grind into paste between my molars and scatter across my tongue, leaving a diaphanous hint of starchy sweetness. Delicious. Absolutely delicious.  
&emsp I stared at that crumb for some time, wanting to grab it off her leg and eat it. But the thought that it was part of her ration and thus her crumb held me back. Wouldn’t it be inconsiderate and rude to take it from her? But surely she’d seen it lying there on her knee. Didn’t that mean it was possible that she didn’t want it? Could I ask for it? I wanted to ask for it.
Eventually, I did ask for it. She looked at me, smiling slightly. I read a knowingness in that smile. A private understanding, a shared instant of commiseration.  
&emsp “Yes,” she said. “I’m going to eat that crumb on my leg.” And she did.

---

## The mind.
&emsp At Walker Pass at mile 650, Scout and I had a lovely conversation with an older couple we’d been leapfrogging for a few days. One, Kiki, was a dietician and the other, Hot Nuts, was an IT guy, and the four of us together were able to talk about everything from number theory to Linux to trail nutrition. The morning after, Hot Nuts came to us while Kiki was still in their tent and told us that Kiki had confided to him after we’d gone to our tent “how nice it was to talk to someone smart for a change.”  
&emsp I could definitely see where she was coming from. I’d had a chance to observe the group the two were loosely travelling with, and from what I could tell, they spent the majority of their time having the same insipid conversation about their sex lives (you know the one). If I’d been in her shoes, I might have been pretty uncharitable too.   
&emsp The distribution of PCT hiker personalities is biased toward certain traits, but erudition is not one of them. There is, after all, no survival advantage as a thru-hiker to having a well-developed mind. We don’t have to be pioneers or woodsmen; it’s easy enough to stay on the established path, to meet basic needs, and to avoid common hazards. In fact, I personally believe that having a personality dominated by the intellect is a disadvantage on the PCT, because a highly nourished mind tends to crowd out the other aspects of the self, thinking it is always needed even when it isn’t. (Moreover, an intelligent mind is less susceptible to the fallacious rhetoric that is sometimes needed to keep oneself going on-trail). When I first started out, my mind insisted on remaining dominant, even though it and trail life offered little to each other. I felt forced to occupy myself thinking about math to pass time for it. I’d walk without seeing, eyes glazed, trying to reprove some theorem from undergrad instead of paying attention to my surroundings. When I did focus on the present, I often felt myself needing to think about it. It was only later that I was able to relax my mind into rest and just immerse myself in the experience.  
&emsp As my mind receded from the helm, I found myself more in-touch with the rest of my being. Before hiking, I tended to view my body as just a life-support and input system for my brain. It had to be maintained and kept healthy, but only insofar as doing so also made my mind, the complete vessel of my identity, healthier as well. But as the hike went on (especially after the Acton episode) I found myself identifying more strongly with my body. I felt thrilled by its growing endurance and the lean, coiled strength building within it. I felt enriched when I used its keener senses, when I could feel changes in the wind, notice elusive wildlife, or pick up the subtle cues of nearby water or an old fire.  
&emsp Occasionally, for a change, I’d still think about a math problem, and during my whole time on-trail I was never unhappy to meet another person who was intelligent or educated. These included a geophysicist, an astrophysicist, and a mathematician, meeting each of whom was a pleasant and rewarding surprise. Without them, I probably would’ve ended up just as cranky as Kiki. My mind didn’t have to atrophy for the trail; it just had to rule with a little less tyranny.

---

## A Palate Cleanser.
&emsp I’m worried I’ve given the impression so far that the PCT was a constant spiritual pilgrimage characterized solely by grave profundity. Before I close off with more of the same, I’ve included, as palate cleansing and clarification, a few of the anecdotes from this time that were just funny, bizarre, or absurd.  

&emsp Early in the Desert, there’s a dry stretch where a trail angel named Mike has a property with a large free-to-use cistern. On weekends, he comes up with cold drinks and makes food for the hikers dropping in for water, all on a donation-only basis.
&emsp The cistern is a dubious looking cylinder of rusty metal covered in assorted valves and faucets and multicolored paint marks pointing to different ones as ‘the currently functional one; please use.’ With some sleuthing, we located what we thought was the real faucet and managed to refill our bottles. Since it was Saturday, we walked around a bend in the dirt driveway to the main property for food.  
&emsp The place was covered in old junk. In one corner was an old Halloween skeleton with a cowboy hat on its head. In another was the chassis of a 50s era muscle car. A makeshift pit toilet, obscured on precisely none of its four sides, was fully visible from the yard where everyone was sitting. Along one side of the fence was a tin shack full of rusty power tools, and this, we were told, was the place where we could get food. From thoroughly used catering dishes on a rickety plastic table we served ourselves rice, beans, and boiled hot dogs. It was all delicious. We each had three plates. He got a $20 donation.  

&emsp While eating dinner at Agua Dulce (a town of 2500) with a larger group we’d met that day, the person across from me, Podcast, commented that the person behind us looked a lot like Catelyn Jenner.  
&emsp “There really is a strong resemblance,” he said. “But don’t look back now.” So I didn’t.  
&emsp Later, right as our food came, an old woman came up behind me and clapped me and the person next to me on the back. I was annoyed that she’d touch me without asking, and as she talked I grew more and more annoyed at her presumption at interrupting my meal. She was saying something about training for the Olympics in San Jose. It seemed like a mildly interesting story, but I really just wanted to eat my food, and anyway, to me it seemed self-absorbed of her to assume that we’d care.  
&emsp As she moved on from her Olympian days to gender dysphoria, the pin dropped. I was probably the last person at the table to realize who she was, and as I looked around, the stunned and fascinated expressions around me finally made sense. Apparently, one of her sons was outdoorsy and had chosen to live in Agua Dulce for the natural surroundings. So she frequented the restaurant while visiting him.  
&emsp Honestly though, I can’t say that at the moment it made much of a difference to me who she was. For the others’ benefit, I sat up straighter and feigned polite interest. But I still would’ve rather eaten my chicken than had her hand on my shoulder. 
	
&emsp After resting in Mojave (population 4000), Scout and I were standing at a large road junction hoping for a hitch back to the trailhead. We weren’t strangers to hitchhiking by then. We’d hitched into Idyllwild in the open back of a pickup truck and crammed four hikers and a driver into a sedan full of groceries to get into Wrightwood. But never had we had to wait for so long on such a busy street to get a hitch. Finally, after about 90 minutes, a pickup truck pulled out of the parking lot of the small airport in front of us and offered us a ride. It was only halfway through that we learned that we were in his work vehicle. From the airport. And that he was on-duty.  
&emsp “But you guys would’ve been standing there forever,” he said. “I can be gone for a bit.”
&emsp He was gone for an hour.  

&emsp Right before the Aqueduct, in an empty stretch of highway in the middle of a wind farm, is a notorious place called Hikertown. It’s not a town at all. It’s someone’s large, fenced-in square yard, along the sides of which are plywood phone booths painted to look like toy-sized versions of the dressed-up buildings from a Wild West tourist trap town. The whole place feels like a ramshackle settlement from Fallout 3 where some side quest lets you discover that the whole population eats babies.  
&emsp The owner, one “Bob,” offers lodging, showers, and rides down to the Nee Nach market, which he owns and calls simply “the store.” What Bob doesn’t tell you is that there’s another store down the road called the Wee Vill market. This is because Bob hates the Wee Vill market. The Wee Vill market is fine with him, but Bob has some serious beef with them for stealing his business. A real vendetta.  
&emsp We’d decided to go to the Wee Vill market. They advertised rides from the trailhead, so we called them up and, to avoid any drama, waited a good distance from Hikertown for the pickup. When the truck came from the market, it, having no such qualms, turned off the highway before reaching us and went straight up the driveway to Hikertown. As we ran over to meet it, we saw the indomitable Bob marching down his driveway. He reached us right as we’d settled into the seats. The driver rolled down his window.  
&emsp “I don’t want to see you around here any more, y’hear?” he said, shaking a clenched fist at the driver. “Next time you come around here I’m calling the cops.”  
&emsp He marched on away, smoldering with righteous fury. The driver rolled up his window. He turned to us, shrugged, and drove us to the Wee Vill.  
&emsp “That’s literally where we’ve always picked up hikers,” said the woman at the register later. “What does he think the cops are going to do?”  

&emsp In the Sierra, we met a man named Turtle who:    
&emsp Had no shirt or pants.     
&emsp Wore instead a rain poncho that he also used as his tent.
&emsp Hiked in flip-flops.     
&emsp Ate nothing but Huel.     
&emsp Carried a ukulele.     
&emsp Turtle had hiked the section at least three times. It’s hard to say whether he was better or worse equipped than the man we met who, in his life before the PCT, was actually homeless.

&emsp There’s a group of rural communities in Northern California that disowns the state, proclaiming themselves instead the “State of Jefferson.” As we walked down from a hill into the town of Seiad Valley (population 350) in this benighted “state,” we saw signs on every lawn proudly emblazoned with their new state seal. (You should look this thing up, by the way. It’s emphatically ugly).    
&emsp While walking down the main road, we saw a man on a bicycle coming our way. As he came close to us, he cocked his head, took a close look at me, and dismounted his bike.   
&emsp “The black hair,” he said, “Where does it come from?”  
&emsp “Um… what?” I asked.  
&emsp “Your black hair,” he repeated. “Where’d you get it from?”  
&emsp “Um.” I said. “Well, my parents are Chinese.”  
&emsp “Oh!” he said. “Well, good for you.” And he rode on.  

&emsp Just past Three Sisters in Oregon, there’s a small turnoff from the trail where you can go down a remote section of highway to a porta-potty and a small observation tower built from volcanic rock in the 1800s. As I turned right to follow this turnoff, I looked right to see a leftbound car turn off the road and plow straight into the field of volcanic rock leading toward the trail. This was a loose pile of fist-sized to football-sized rocks, so they ended up pretty mired in the pile. It must’ve been hell on their tires. I’m surprised they got out without a flat.  
&emsp A few hundred feet closer to the observatory, I heard a car coming up behind me. Looking back, I saw that it was the same car, newly unstuck. It slowed down, pulled up next to me, and rolled a back window down. A copiously pierced young woman looked out at me.  
&emsp “Do you want a beer?” she asked.  
&emsp “Uh,” I said.  
&emsp “Do you want a cold beer?” she asked again, holding a local craft pilsner out the window. Behind her, a gaggle of equally pierced young women giggled and elbowed each other.  
&emsp “Sure,” I said. “I’d love a cold beer.”  
&emsp A few minutes later, we came across a cooler someone had left with more beer in it. Feeling myself from the first beer, I took another. 40 pounds lighter, with no tolerance and an empty stomach, two beers got me pretty buzzed. It took all my focus to not break an ankle picking my way across the loose rock in the strong wind. But, beery as I was, that just made me feel badass. Scout was impressed, too.  

---

## Love
&emsp At Warner Springs, very early in the trail, I met a Dutch hiker, Pitstop, who seemed impressed that Scout and I had chosen to walk the PCT together.   
&emsp “There’s a reason that most people who come here with a partner are married to them,” he said. “It’s a big commitment, and I have a hard time imagining I could trust someone enough to take it on with them unless I were married to them. But I suppose,” he said wryly, “it’s also a good way to find out if you’re compatible with someone. You learn everything about them.” 
These claims felt dubious to me, derived more from cliché than evidence, and when I shared his thoughts with Scout later she felt the same. Neither of us saw any difference between us hiking together and pairs of friends hiking together, which was more common. We didn’t feel either like we’d learned much about each other. On that second point, though, we conceded that perhaps we just hadn’t had enough time.   
&emsp Time did indeed vindicate Pitstop somewhat on that count. I wouldn’t say I learned ‘everything’, but what I did learn was enough.   
&emsp I learned how aspects of her that I had already appreciated manifested and grew. Scout is a woman in whom rare combinations of positive but opposing qualities balance--strength and humility, ambition and kindness, idealism and practicality, wonder and groundedness--all of which were brought out in equal measure by the trail. She was always able to endure past where I could, but still knew when she needed to stop. She was always the one pushing our mileage further (actually, the whole hike was her idea to begin with), but she never hesitated to stop and help someone else when they needed it. She was captivated by the wildlife and scenery, but was clear-headed and incisive when she needed to be. The trail was, I now believe, a place where she flourished. I’m glad I was there to witness it.   
&emsp I also learned what kinds of friction the two of us generated while spending every waking moment together under considerable stress. We had our share of fights on-trail, and I grew more mature at handling them when they came and recognizing the toxic patterns in myself that contributed to them. A nontrivial proportion of unmarried couples who start the PCT break up before they finish, but, despite some fairly serious clashes, the two of us weren’t among them.   
&emsp So the most important thing the trail taught me was that, no matter what faced us, I could rely on and trust her. The two of us have always been intentional about wanting to be two halves of a partnership, and on-trail I believe we achieved that.    &emsp There is a gap between any two humans that I don’t think anything can fully bridge, but later in the trail it I often felt as though there was no separation between us at all. We could pick up on or preempt each other’s thoughts and feelings. We could hike wordlessly for hours, or strike camp in total silence. We could spontaneously and smoothly work together. We could split tasks, on trail or in town, with crisp, practiced efficiency.   
&emsp To go into town, in fact, was to starkly highlight our new closeness. To us, the townspeople seemed soft, overcivilized, and obsessed with superficial polish. To them, we seemed wild, dirty, disheveled, and crazy. I felt a kinship with all other hikers when alienated like this, but especially, above all, with Scout, with whom, like I’ve said, I spent every waking moment. Surrounded by strange, prim people living regular lives, I appreciated how she alone could understand my experiences of the past months. And when we’d finished our shopping, had stripped off and washed our sweatstained clothing, had cleaned our gear, had washed our bodies, we were free to keep alive a gentle intimacy that could not be maintained on-trail.   
&emsp There is a toughness and poise required to exist on-trail that prevents one from being completely vulnerable. Alone in a hotel room, we could finally relax. And, of course, we could make love. We could hold the other in the warmth and softness. We could feel the changes the trail had wrought in their body. It hurt to see the sharp grooves etched into Scout by hunger, to feel the bony protrusions of her hips and ribs. But the strength that was there too, the Spartan efficiency, the taut muscle, the quiescent endurance, awakened an admiration and arousal of a kind that had not been there in our previous life together.  
&emsp To spend every waking moment together for so long, living so unifying a life, and then have to leave each other in Oregon, one of us to start a PhD, one of us to continue on to Canada before a different PhD elsewhere, was incredibly hard. The night of our last resupply stop before I left, Scout told me that she didn’t know how the two of us were going to make it. What if she couldn’t go on without me? Her voice quavered as she wondered whether we’d made a mistake in growing so close to each other only to have to leave each other at the last.   
&emsp “When I’m gone,” I said, “Nothing you do will have changed. You’ll still be doing the same thing you’ve already done for four months. And you only have to do it for one month more.”  
&emsp “Yeah…” she said. “But in another sense everything will have changed, because it makes all the difference for you to be doing it there with me.”  

---

## Coming Back
&emsp “Then what about after?” she asked later that night. “What about after the trail, when we have to be apart for five years?”    
&emsp I thought for a while. “We’ve been apart before,” I said eventually, (we’d gone to different undergrads). “I think we can be apart again. And if we can’t? I’ve learned here that math is important to me, but to have someone to love, be loved by, to rely on, and to trust, is far more important.”     
&emsp “I’ve learned that I can live without math,” I said. “I don’t think I can live without that. If it comes down to it, I will choose you over my degree.”    
&emsp Four days later, we met my ride back from the trail. The day after that I drove away to Spokane, while she kept living a Northbound life. When I talk to her, she tells me that it’s been hard for her to continue alone, to sleep by herself in a tent meant for two. It is cold in there without me, especially in the mornings. Those mornings are the hardest, she says. It is hard to convince herself to go.    
&emsp It’s been hard for me too to leave the trail. To allow my body and mind to change back where they need to. To think solely again about mathematical abstractions and imaginary futures. To sleep alone, wake up alone, and get up not to Scout, but to a school full of people who, though friendly, intelligent, and multifariously interesting, will take time to become friends.  
&emsp Nights are the hardest for me, not mornings. So they were too for Genly Ai, who, in The Left Hand of Darkness, spends two months on a glacier. I relate to him deeply when he says, in retrospect:    
	```Sometimes as I am falling asleep I have for a moment a great and treasurable illusion of the past. The wall of a tent leans up over my face... in such fortunate moments I know beyond a doubt what the real center of my life is, that time that is past and lost and yet is permanent.  
I am not trying to say I was happy, during those weeks of hauling a sledge across an ice sheet in the dead of winter. I was hungry, overstrained, and often anxious, and it all got worse the longer it went on. I certainly wasn't happy. Happiness has to do with reason, and only reason earns it. What I was given was the thing you can't earn, and can't keep, and often don't even recognize at the time; I mean joy.```   
&emsp There are nights when that great and treasurable illusion overwhelms me, when my heart calls so painfully for Scout and the trail that to have ever left them feels like a gross and irredeemable stupidity. Around those inextricable twin centers of my real life, it says, there was a true and meaningful existence, but in ignorance I left them for a kind of empty afterlife. In the lonely dark, my new life really feels that intangible, that pointless. I find no substance or reality in it. In its empty comforts and tawdry pleasures, there is sometimes happiness, but never joy. Never meaning. Never Scout.   
&emsp But at school the next morning I remember with equanimity the reasons that I chose this newest new life. Life as a whole is composed of a series of smaller lives changing into each other; to deny that is to cleave to fantasy. I am able to not choose to quit this newest one; to do so would betray the reasons I chose to start it. Nor does staying here betray my other values, for while I’m here, although Scout and I will be more distant, the trust and reliance will remain. Like the PCT, this life as a PhD student, far away from Scout though it may be, offers both challenges and opportunities. If all I’ve said about the PCT is true, it’s equipped me to handle the first and to seize the second.
